# Unique IDs

<EpicVideo url="https://www.epicreact.dev/workshops/react-hooks/intro-to-unique-ids" />

To build accessible forms, you need to ensure that each input element has a
globally unique `id` attribute, and that the corresponding label element has a
`for` attribute that matches the input's `id`. This allows screen readers to
associate the label with the input, making it easier for users to understand the
form's structure and purpose. Additionally, it allows users to click on the
label to focus the input, which can be especially helpful for users with motor
impairments (or like, for everyone you know?).

This gets challenging with reusable components, especially when they're used
multiple times on the same page. You can't just hardcode an `id` value, because
then you'd have multiple elements with the same `id`, which is invalid HTML. You
could use a random number or string, but then you'd have to manage that
yourself, and it wouldn't be consistent between renders. And if you want to
server render your app, you'd have to make sure the ID that's generated on the
client matches the one that was generated on the server to avoid bugs which is
a pain.

This is where the `useId` hook comes into play.

The `useId` hook generates a unique and stable identifier (ID) that you can use
for DOM elements.

Here's an example of how you can use the `useId` hook in a form component:

```tsx
function FormField() {
	const id = useId()
	return (
		<div>
			<label htmlFor={id}>Name:</label>
			<input id={id} type="text" />
		</div>
	)
}
```

In this example, `useId` generates a unique ID that links the label to the
input, ensuring that screen readers and other assistive technologies can
correctly identify the form field relationship.

Unlike `useState` or `useEffect`, `useId` does not accept any arguments and
returns a single string value. There's no setter or updater function because the
ID it provides is meant to be constant and unique throughout the component's
lifecycle.

It's especially useful in server-side rendering (SSR) contexts because it
ensures consistency between server-generated IDs and client-side generated ones,
avoiding hydration mismatches.

Remember, the main use of `useId` is for accessibility and managing
relationships between different DOM elements, like labels and inputs. It helps
keep your UI predictable and accessible without having to manage unique IDs
yourself.

One important thing to call out is that you should never use `useId` to generate
IDs for non-DOM elements, like keys in a list or unique keys for React elements.
Those IDs should come from your data, not from `useId`.

ðŸ“œ Check [the `useId` docs](https://react.dev/reference/react/useId) for more
info. (There's this interesting `identifierPrefix` feature you'll probably never
use too! ðŸ˜…)
